Add documentation for Delta Lake connector (#11229)
trinodb/trino: docs/src/main/sphinx/connector/delta-lake.rst

        update the metadata cache specified in :ref:`prop-type-duration`.
      - ``5m``
    * - ``delta.metadata.live-files.cache-size``
      - Amount of memory allocated for caching information about files. Needs
        to be specified in :ref:`prop-type-data-size` values such as ``64MB``.
        Default is calculated to 10% of the maximum memory allocated to the JVM.
      -
    * - ``delta.max-partitions-per-writer``
      - Maximum number of partitions per writer.
      - 100
    * - ``delta.hide-non-delta-lake-tables``
      - Hide information about tables that are not managed by Delta Lake. Hiding
        only applies to tables with the metadata managed in a Glue catalog, does
        not apply to usage with a Hive metastore service.
      - ``false``
    * - ``delta.enable-non-concurrent-writes``
      - Enable :ref:`write support <delta-lake-write-support>` for all
        supported file systems, specifically take note of the warning about
        concurrency and checkpoints.
      - ``false``
    * - ``delta.default-checkpoint-writing-interval``
      - Default integer count to write transaction log checkpoint entries. If

>         the value is set to N, then checkpoints are after every Nth statement

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        the value is set to N, then checkpoints are written after every Nth statement
```

The connector supports creating schemas. You can create a schema with or without
a specified location.

You can create a schema with the :doc:`/sql/create-schema` statement and the
``location`` schema property. Tables in this schema are located in a
subdirectory under the schema location. Data files for tables in this schema
using the default location are cleaned up if the table is dropped::

  CREATE SCHEMA delta.my_schema
  WITH (location = 's3://my-bucket/a/path');

Optionally, the location can be omitted. Tables in this schema must have a
location included when you create them. The data files for these tables are not
removed if the table is dropped::

  CREATE SCHEMA delta.my_schema;

.. _delta-lake-create-table:

Creating tables
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

When Delta tables exist in storage, but not in the metastore, Trino can be used
to register them::

  CREATE TABLE delta.default.my_table (
    dummy bigint
  )
  WITH (
    location = '...'
  )

Columns listed in the DDL, such as ``dummy`` in the preceeding example, are
ignored. The table schema is read from the transaction log, instead. If the
schema is changed by an external system, Trino automatically uses the new
schema.

> The connector automatically writes the initial transaction log entries and
> registers the table in the metastore, when creating a new table. As a result,

Reviewer: Super nit pick, but I think this sentence is clearer if you flip the ordering.
```suggestion
If the specified location does not already contain a Delta table the connector automatically writes the 
initial transaction log entries and registers the table in the metastore. As a result,
```

any Databricks engine can write to the table::

   CREATE TABLE delta.default.new_table (id bigint, address varchar);

The Delta Lake connector also supports creating tables using the :doc:`CREATE
TABLE AS </sql/create-table-as>` syntax. There are three table properties

> available for use in table creation.

Reviewer: Maybe separate out these paragraphs? The table properties work for all tables, not just ones created by CTAS

:doc:`/sql/update` data in Delta Lake tables.

Write operations are supported for tables stored on the following systems:

* Azure ADLS Gen2

  Writes to the Azure ADLS Gen2 file system are enabled by default. Trino
  detects write collisions on ADLS Gen2 when writing from multiple Trino
  clusters, or from as any number of open source Delta Lake clusters.

* S3 and S3-compatible storage

  Writes to :doc:`Amazon S3 <hive-s3>` and S3-compatible storage must be enabled
  with the ``delta.enable-non-concurrent-writes`` property. Writes to S3 can
  safely be made from multiple Trino clusters, however write collisions are not
  detected when writing concurrently from other Delta Lake engines. You need to
  make sure that no concurrent data modifications are run to avoid data
  corruption.

Performance
-----------

The connector includes a number of performance improvements, detailed in the
following sections:

* Support for :doc:`write partitioning </admin/properties-write-partitioning>`.

.. _delta-lake-table-statistics:

Table statistics
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

You can use :doc:`/sql/analyze` statements in Trino to populate the table

> statistics in Delta Lake. The :doc:`cost-based optimizer

Reviewer: Specifically NDV stats. Min/max/null count stats are not populated by ANALYZE

        able to start.
      - Integer.MAX_VALUE
    * - ``delta.max-initial-splits``
      - For each query, the coordinator assigns file sections to read first
        at the ``initial-split-size`` until the ``max-initial-splits`` is
        reached. Then, it starts issuing reads of the ``max-split-size`` size.
      - 200
    * - ``delta.max-initial-split-size``
      - Sets the initial :ref:`prop-type-data-size` for a single read section
        assigned to a worker until ``max-initial-splits`` have been processed.
        You can also use the corresponding catalog session property
        ``<catalog-name>.max_initial_split_size``.
      - ``32MB``
    * - ``delta.max-split-size``
      - Sets the largest :ref:`prop-type-data-size` for a single read section
        assigned to a worker after max-initial-splits have been processed. You
        can also use the corresponding catalog session property
        ``<catalog-name>.max_split_size``.
      - ``64MB``

The following table describes :ref:`catalog session properties
<session-properties-definition>` supported by the Delta Lake connector to
configure processing of Parquet files.

> .. list-table:: Parquet catalog session properties

Reviewer 2: In Delta, are files are Parquet files, so this distinction isn't desireable.

cc @findinpath @krvikash

Reviewer 3: > In Delta, all files are Parquet files, so this distinction isn't desirable.

Can you please add a bit more detail to your comment/suggestion?

Reviewer 2: for example 
"Parquet catalog session properties" -> "catalog session properties"

remove "configure processing of Parquet files."

Reviewer 4: This PR has been merged for over a year .. please discuss this all on a new PR.

Reviewer 3: I'll create a follow-up PR with all delta session properties.

Reviewer 2: > This PR has been merged for over a year 

@mosabua is there some specific amount of time after which  feedback is no longer welcome?

@findinpath thank you

Reviewer 4: No there is no specific time @findepi .. commenting on an old PR just very much limits the audience of who will find out about an issue. The docs might have wildly changed since the PR was merged as well.

The Delta Lake connector allows querying data stored in `Delta Lake
<https://delta.io>`_ format, including `Databricks Delta Lake
<https://docs.databricks.com/delta/index.html>`_. It can natively read the Delta
transaction log and thus detect when external systems change data.

Requirements
------------

To connect to Databricks Delta Lake, you need:

* Tables written by Databricks Runtime 7.3 LTS and 9.1 LTS are supported.
* Deployments using AWS, HDFS, and Azure Storage are fully supported. Using
  Google Cloud Storage is not supported.
* Network access from the coordinator and workers to the Delta Lake storage.
* Access to the Hive metastore service (HMS) of Delta Lake or a separate HMS.
* Network access to the HMS from the coordinator and workers. Port 9083 is the
  default port for the Thrift protocol used by the HMS.

Configuration
-------------

The connector requires a Hive metastore for table metadata and supports the same
metastore configuration properties as the :doc:`Hive connector
</connector/hive>`. At a minimum, ``hive.metastore.uri`` must be configured.

The connector recognizes Delta tables created in the metastore by the Databricks

> runtime. If non-Delta tables are present in the metastore, as well, they will

Reviewer 4: they are not visible

not be visible to the connector.

> To configure the Delta Lake connector, create a catalog file, for example

Reviewer 4: catalog properties file

``etc/catalog/delta.properties``, that references the ``delta-lake`` connector.
Update the ``hive.metastore.uri`` with the URI of your Hive metastore Thrift
service:

.. code-block:: properties

    connector.name=delta-lake
    hive.metastore.uri=thrift://example.net:9083

If you are using AWS Glue as Hive metastore, you can simply set the metastore to
``glue``:

.. code-block:: properties

    connector.name=delta-lake
    hive.metastore=glue

The Delta Lake connector reuses certain functionalities from the Hive connector,

> including the metastore thrift and glue configuration, detailed in the

Reviewer 4: Thrift and Glue

> :doc:`Hive connector documentation </connector/hive>`.

Reviewer 4: Maybe we can reword and replace this with links to specific sections or tables. Need to check if that exists..

To configure access to S3 and S3-compatible storage, Azure storage, and others,

> consult the Amazon S3 section of :doc:`Hive connector documentation

Reviewer 4: Make the link include the Amazon S3 ideally and link to the specific section, if necessary .. add an anchor

</connector/hive>` or :doc:`the Azure storage documentation
</connector/hive-azure>`, respectively.

Configuration properties
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The following configuration properties are all using reasonable, tested default
values. Typical usage does not require you to configure them.

.. list-table:: Delta Lake configuration properties
    :widths: 30, 50, 20
    :header-rows: 1

    * - Property name
      - Description
      - Default value
    * - ``delta.metadata.cache-ttl``
      - Frequency of checks for metadata updates, equivalent to transactions, to
        update the metadata cache

>       - 5 min

Reviewer 4: Change to actual value syntax (need to look up time properties values for minutes..)

    * - ``delta.metadata.live-files.cache-size``
      - Amount of memory allocated for caching information about files. Needs

>         to be specified in data size values such as ``64 MB``.

Reviewer 4: link data size files to the properites data type info

      - Calculated to 10% of the maximum memory allocated to the coordinator
        JVM.
    * - ``delta.max-partitions-per-writer``
      - Maximum number of partitions per writer.
      - 100
    * - ``delta.hide-non-delta-lake-tables``
      - Hide information about tables that are not managed by Delta Lake. Hiding
        only applies to tables with the metadata managed in a Glue catalog, does
        not apply to usage with a Hive metastore service.

>       - false

Reviewer 4: code hightlight

Author: Do numerical entries get code highlights, as well? As of now, only some are already highlighted in the tables of this document.

    * - ``delta.enable-non-concurrent-writes``
      - Enable :ref:`write support <delta-lake-write-support>` for all
        supported file systems, specifically take note of the warning about
        concurrency and checkpoints.
      - ``false``
    * - ``delta.default-checkpoint-writing-interval``
      - Default integer count to write transaction log checkpoint entries. If
        the value is set to N, then checkpoints are after every Nth statement
        performing table writes. The value can be overridden for a specific
        table with the ``checkpoint_interval`` table property.
      - ``10``
    * - ``delta.hive-catalog-name``
      - Name of the catalog to which ``SELECT`` queries are redirected when a

>         Hive table is detected

Reviewer 4: detected.

exposes metadata in a number of hidden columns in each table. You can use these
columns in your SQL statements like any other column, e.g., they can be selected
directly or used in conditional statements.

* ``$path``
    Full file system path name of the file for this row.

* ``$file_modified_time``
    Date and time of the last modification of the file for this row.

* ``$file_size``
    Size of the file for this row.

.. _delta-lake-create-schema:

Creating schemas
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The connector supports creating metastore schemas, optionally with a location
specified.

You can create a schema without a location with the base
:doc:`/sql/create-schema` statement. Tables in this schema must have a location
included when you create them. The data files for these tables are not removed
if the table is dropped::

  CREATE SCHEMA delta.my_schema;

Optionally, a location can be specified. Tables in this schema do not need to
have a location. By default they are located in a subdirectory under the schema
location. The data files for tables in this schema using the default location
are cleaned up if the table is dropped::

>   CREATE SCHEMA delta.my_schema WITH (location = 's3://my-bucket/a/path');

Reviewer 4: We might have to document the supported schema properties

.. _delta-lake-create-table:

Creating tables
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

When Delta tables exist in storage, but not in the metastore, Trino can be used
to register them::

  CREATE TABLE delta.default.my_table (
    dummy bigint
  )
  WITH (

>     location = '...'

Reviewer 4: We might have to document the supported table properties

  )

> Columns listed in the DDL, such as ``dummy`` in the above example, are ignored.

Reviewer 4: in the preceding example

The table schema is read from the transaction log, instead. If the schema is
changed by an external system, Trino automatically uses the new schema.

> 

Reviewer 4: remove empty line

The Delta Lake connector also supports creating tables using the ``CREATE TABLE

> AS`` syntax. There are two table properties available for use in table creation.

Reviewer 4: Link to docs

The connector automatically writes the initial transaction log entries and
registers the table in the metastore, when creating a new table. As a result any
Databricks engine can write to the table::

   CREATE TABLE delta.default.new_table (id bigint, address varchar);

The connector also supports creating tables using the ``CREATE TABLE AS``

> syntax. There are two table properties available for use in table creation.

Reviewer 4: Duplicate from earlier .. also what are the properties .. looks like there are three in the examples

JMX bean.

You can access it with any standard monitoring software with JMX support, or use
the :doc:`/connector/jmx` with the following query::

  SELECT * FROM jmx.current."*.plugin.deltalake.transactionlog:name=<catalog-name>,type=transactionlogaccess"

Following is an example result:

.. code-block:: text

  datafilemetadatacachestats.hitrate      | 0.97
  datafilemetadatacachestats.missrate     | 0.03
  datafilemetadatacachestats.requestcount | 3232
  metadatacachestats.hitrate              | 0.98
  metadatacachestats.missrate             | 0.02
  metadatacachestats.requestcount         | 6783
  node                                    | trino-master
  object_name                             | io.trino.plugin.deltalake.transactionlog:type=TransactionLogAccess,name=delta

In a healthy system both ``datafilemetadatacachestats.hitrate`` and
``metadatacachestats.hitrate`` are close to ``1.0``.

Security
--------

The connector includes a number of security-related features, detailed in the
following sections.

Authorization
^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The connector supports standard Hive security for authorization. For
configuration properties, see the 'Authorization' section in

> :doc:`/connector/hive-security`.

Reviewer 5: Nope.
